*[Back to index](</readme.md>)*
___
### Types

*A type is how Python represents different types of data.*

Python is an object-oriented language. There are many different types of objects in Python, some of the most common objects are integers (`int`), strings (`str`) floats (`float`) and boolean (`bool`). The data type in Python can be determined using the type command.

<details><summary>Variable Types</summary>

```python
## Declare Variables of different types 
age = 38
height = 1.6
name = "Amanda"
check = True

print ("Name: ", name, type(name))
print ("Height: ", height, type(height))
print ("Age: ", age, type(age))
print ("Check: ", check, type(check))
```
</details>

Will output:
```
Name:  Amanda <class 'str'>
Height:  1.6 <class 'float'>
Age:  38 <class 'int'>
Check:  True <class 'bool'>
```
*See [Expressions and Variables](1.3%20Expressions%20and%20Variables.md#variables-from-user-input) for information on variables*

* **Integers:** The set of real numbers with no decimal or fraction; -1, 2, 1000 etc
* **Floats:** Numbers that contain a decimal; 1.5, 3.14, 166.456 etc
* **Strings:** A Sequence of characters that can include letters, numbers or symbols; "This is a sring, 33 !"
* **Boolean:** A data type that can only have one of two possible values, most commonly True/False (Note: case is important)

There are some limitations when it comes to machines representing real numbers, but floating point numbers are a good representation in most cases. The specifics of floats for a given runtime environment can be checked using `sys.float_info`. This will also show the largest and smallest number that can be represented with them (*Note: `sys` must be imported first*).
___
### Type Casting
Expression types can be changed in python, this is called type casting. the integer 2 can be cast to a float as follows:

<details><summary>Cast Integer to Float</summary>

```python
float(2)
```
</details>

Will output:
```
2.0
```
Note that when casting a float to an integer, information can be lost; for example casting 1.1 to an integer will result in 1.

If a string contains an integer value, it can be converted to a float or int; however this is only possible if the string contains only numerical characters; for example
<details><summary>Cast String to Integer or Float</summary>

```python
int('1')
float('1.2')
```
</details>

Will output:
```
1
1.2
```

While `int(1 and some text)` would result in an error.

Boolean can be cast to an integer or float.  
If a Boolean True is cast to an integer or float it will result in `1` or `1.0`.  
If a Boolean false is cast to an integer or float it will result in `0` or `0.0`. 
Similarly a `1`/`0` cast to boolean will result in `True`/`False` respectively.

___
### Advanced Type Casting
There are more advanced ways to do type casting, for example, taking an [input](1.3%20Expressions%20and%20Variables.md#variables-from-user-input) (which is aways a string), and casting it to an integer; however the required input type should be made clear to the user and [exception handling *Needs Update 3.5](/x3%20Python%20Programming%20Fundamentals/x3.5%20Exception%20Handling.md) is a very good idea.  
<details><summary>Cast User Input to Integer</summary>

```py
age = int(input("Enter your age: "))
```
</details>
